Update EIP-7742: update the required EL headers and the gas fee mechanism (#9047)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-7742.md

## Abstract

> Update blob maximum, target, and blob gas fee computation from [EIP-4844](./eip-4844.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Update the verification of blob maximum and target, and blob gas fee computation from [EIP-4844](./eip-4844.md).
```

The protocol specifies a maximum allowed blobs per block to prevent DoS vectors via the abuse of this data facility.
The protocol also maintains an [EIP-1559](./eip-1559.md)-like "target" value for an intended running average amount of blob throughput per
unit time. Blob usage is compared against this target to influence a "blob base fee" to administer allocation of this
resource to users of the Ethereum protocol.

Both of these values are currently hard-coded in the EL after EIP-4844 and the blob maximum is separately hard-coded in
the CL following EIP-4844. This EIP proposes a set of changes to uncouple these values across the CL and EL to make development
and deployment of changes to the blobs per block easier.

#### Maximum blobs per block

The blob maximum is verified in the CL node and the EL inherits this verification during the consistency check of the
versioned hashes corresponding to each blob as specified by the Engine API. Because of this, the strict check specified
by EIP-4844 is unnecessary.

For optimistically synced blocks from peer nodes, EL may further assume that the entire ancestor EL peer synced chain

> blocks correctly obeys this condition by the canonicality and correctness of the block they backfilling from as instructed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
blocks correctly obeys this condition by the canonicality and correctness of the block they backfill from as instructed
```

This target is now driven by the CL which sends the current target value to the EL for purposes of `excess_blob_gas` accumulation and validation. The EL block header will also need to be extended with this `target_blobs_per_block` value to preserve the security of optimistic sync.

The target blobs per block in CL (and hence indirectly in EL) is also increased from [EIP-4844](./eip-4844.md)'s `OLD_TARGET_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK` to `TARGET_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK_EIP_7742`.

#### Normalized `excess_gas`

With the changing target, we also need to scale the `BLOB_BASE_FEE_UPDATE_FRACTION` from [EIP-4844](./eip-4844.md) accordingly to bound the price jumps by +-12.5%. But this introduces some irregularity whenever target gets updated because excess blob gas (accumulated via old target) is now effectively scaled down by this changed fraction in the fee calculations.

To mitigate this irregularity, we now save a _normalized_ excess gas with respect to a fixed `EXCESS_BLOB_GAS_NORMALIZATION_TARGET` and use a corresponding `BLOB_BASE_FEE_UPDATE_FRACTION_NORMALIZED` in the base fee calculations.

#### Increased min blob base fee

> The community feels that there is a need to increase the min blob base fee for a fair blob market. To this end the base fee per blob gas will be increased to `MIN_BASE_FEE_PER_BLOB_GAS_EIP_7742`.

Author: yes, but may be i can just add @MaxResnick  as author too and we sort of compress this into this EIP if we want to include this, whatever the ACD thinks is the best approach

> The community feels that there is a need to increase the min blob base fee for a fair blob market. To this end the base fee per blob gas will be increased to `MIN_BASE_FEE_PER_BLOB_GAS_EIP_7742`.

Author: removed from the PR

Any reference to `TARGET_BLOB_GAS_PER_BLOCK` from [EIP-4844](./eip-4844.md) (for e.g. for `excess_blob_gas` calculations) can be derived by taking the `target_blobs_per_block` from the EL block header and multiplying by `GAS_PER_BLOB`.

Validity of these values is guaranteed from the consensus layer, much like how withdrawals are handled. Hence when verifying a block, execution clients **MUST** ensure the target blobs per block in the block header matches the one provided by the consensus client.

Furthermore `get_base_fee_per_blob_gas` as specified by [EIP-4844](./eip-4844.md) is as modified below:

```python
def calc_excess_blob_gas(parent: Header) -> int:
  # normalize parent's excess blob gas if this block was fork block
  if(parent.timestamp < FORK_TIMESTAMP)
    normalized_parent_excess_blob_gas = parent.excess_blob_gas * EXCESS_BLOB_GAS_NORMALIZATION_TARGET_BLOBS // OLD_TARGET_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK
    target_blobs_per_block = OLD_TARGET_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK
  else
    normalized_parent_excess_blob_gas = parent.excess_blob_gas
    target_blobs_per_block = parent.target_blobs_per_block

>   return (normalized_parent_excess_blob_gas + (parent.blob_gas_used - target_blob_gas) * EXCESS_BLOB_GAS_NORMALIZATION_TARGET_BLOBS // target_blobs_per_block)

Reviewer 2: I believe this can be simplified to 
`return (normalized_parent_excess_blob_gas + (parent.blob_gas_used - target_blob_gas) // target_blob_gas)`

With:
`NEW_BLOB_BASE_FEE_UPDATE_FRACTION_NORMALIZED = BLOB_BASE_FEE_UPDATE_FRACTION_NORMALIZED /128/GAS_PER_BLOB`

Then there is no need for `EXCESS_BLOB_GAS_NORMALIZATION_TARGET_BLOBS ` since it's `=1` and also all the terms are in the same unit, blob gas.

@g11tech wdyt?

Author: because (parent.blob_gas_used - target_blob_gas) // target_blob_gas) will be most likely evaluate to 0 int and we would want error accumulation to be some sensitive range which is what the above equation does

The protocol also maintains an [EIP-1559](./eip-1559.md)-like "target" value for an intended running average amount of blob throughput per
unit time. Blob usage is compared against this target to influence a "blob base fee" to administer allocation of this
resource to users of the Ethereum protocol.

Both of these values are currently hard-coded in the EL after EIP-4844 and the blob maximum is separately hard-coded in
the CL following EIP-4844. This EIP proposes a set of changes to uncouple these values across the CL and EL to make development
and deployment of changes to the blobs per block easier.

#### Maximum blobs per block

The blob maximum is verified in the CL node and the EL inherits this verification during the consistency check of the versioned hashes corresponding to each blob as specified by the Engine API. Because of this, the strict check specified by EIP-4844 is unnecessary.

For optimistically synced blocks from peer nodes, EL may further assume that the entire ancestor EL peer synced chain blocks correctly obeys this condition by the canonicality and correctness of the block they backfilling from as instructed by the CL.

> Hence we entirely deprecated the `MAX_BLOB_GAS_PER_BLOCK` checks from [EIP-4844](./eip-4844.md) in the EL while letting the maximum blobs per block constraints in the CL stay at `6` equivalent to `MAX_BLOB_GAS_PER_BLOCK`.

Reviewer: I would say something like this as it is confusing when we later suggest raising the max below

```suggestion
Hence we entirely deprecated the `MAX_BLOB_GAS_PER_BLOCK` checks from [EIP-4844](./eip-4844.md) in the EL while letting the maximum blobs per block constraint to be checked by the CL.
```

#### Increased min blob base fee

The community feels that there is a need to increase the min blob base fee for a fair blob market. To this end the base fee per blob gas will be increased to `MIN_BASE_FEE_PER_BLOB_GAS_EIP_7742`.

## Specification

| Constant | Value | Remarks|
| - | - | - |
| `OLD_TARGET_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK` | `3` | blob target corresponding to [EIP-4844](./eip-4844.md) |
| `TARGET_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK_EIP_7742` | `4` | increase the target blobs to `4`|
| `MIN_BASE_FEE_PER_BLOB_GAS_EIP_7742` | `2**25` | the new min blob base fee |
| `EXCESS_BLOB_GAS_NORMALIZATION_TARGET_BLOBS` | `128` | normalize excess gas to a target of `128` blobs |
| `BLOB_BASE_FEE_UPDATE_FRACTION_PER_TARGET_BLOB` | `1112825` | used to calculate normalized update fraction for excess gas |
| `BLOB_BASE_FEE_UPDATE_FRACTION_NORMALIZED` | `142441600`| excess gas update fraction for the normalized target of `128` blobs |

### Block processing

Upon activation of this EIP, execution clients **MUST** extend the header schema with an

> additional 64-bit field: the `target_blobs_per_block`. This values is set to the one provided by the CL during block production.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
additional 64-bit field: the `target_blobs_per_block`. This value is set to the one provided by the CL during block production.
```

Any reference to `TARGET_BLOB_GAS_PER_BLOCK` from [EIP-4844](./eip-4844.md) (for e.g. for `excess_blob_gas` calculations) can be derived by taking the `target_blobs_per_block` from the EL block header and multiplying by `GAS_PER_BLOB`.

Validity of these values is guaranteed from the consensus layer, much like how withdrawals are handled. Hence when verifying a block, execution clients **MUST** ensure the target blobs per block in the block header matches the one provided by the consensus client.

Furthermore `get_base_fee_per_blob_gas` as specified by [EIP-4844](./eip-4844.md) is as modified below:

```python
def calc_excess_blob_gas(parent: Header) -> int:
  # normalize parent's excess blob gas if this block was fork block

>   if(parent.timestamp < FORK_TIMESTAMP)

Reviewer: there is no way to deploy this rule before the fork and so this clause for `parent.timestamp < FORK_TIMESTAMP` would never be reachable, it should be removed

Reviewer: if you want to do the conversion logic at the fork boundary, I think this should instead be `if parent.timestamp == FORK_TIMESTAMP`

Reviewer 3: At the fork boundary, I think it's possible for `parent.timestamp < FORK_TIMESTAMP` and `header.timestamp >= FORK_TIMESTAMP`.
This new calculation is activated at the fork but still operating on the parent block's data (which doesn't include target_blobs_per_block) so I think it makes sense to use the old hardcoded target here.

Author: ahh yes as @siladu pointed out, parent is pre 7742 and this logic runs for calculation of the excess gas for the current fork block

Reviewer: ah, I see what's going on now, thanks!

Even if the EL keeps a fixed target value based on the max, removing the max implies the EL would not know what the target
value should be. To address this lack of information, this EIP proposes the CL sends the current target value to the EL
with each provided payload over the Engine API. The EL block header will also need to be extended with this target value
(`target_blobs_per_block`) to preserve the security of optimistic sync.

#### Normalized `excess_gas`

> With the changing target, we also need to scale the `BLOB_BASE_FEE_UPDATE_FRACTION` from [EIP-4844](./eip-4844.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To account for future target increases, we also need to scale the `BLOB_BASE_FEE_UPDATE_FRACTION` from [EIP-4844](./eip-4844.md)
```

accordingly to bound the price jumps by +-12.5%. But this introduces some irregularity whenever target gets updated because
excess blob gas (accumulated via old target) is now effectively scaled down by this changed fraction in the fee calculations.

To mitigate this irregularity, we now save a _normalized_ excess gas with respect to a fixed

> `EXCESS_BLOB_GAS_NORMALIZATION_TARGET` and use a corresponding `BLOB_BASE_FEE_UPDATE_FRACTION_NORMALIZED` in the base fee

Reviewer: `EXCESS_BLOB_GAS_NORMALIZATION_TARGET` here does not match the defined constant with `_BLOB` suffix.

I think its cleaner to just call it `EXCESS_BLOB_GAS_NORMALIZATION_TARGET` but in either case the EIP should be consistent.

Author: yea was remanent from an old iteration, will fix

calculations.

## Specification

| Constant | Value | Remarks|
| - | - | - |

> | `OLD_TARGET_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK` | `3` | blob target corresponding to [EIP-4844](./eip-4844.md) |

Reviewer: nitpick, but I think better to call this `TARGET_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK_4844` as "old" is a relative term and may not age as well across protocol development

| `EXCESS_BLOB_GAS_NORMALIZATION_TARGET_BLOBS` | `128` | normalize excess gas to a target of `128` blobs |
| `BLOB_BASE_FEE_UPDATE_FRACTION_PER_TARGET_BLOB` | `1112825` | used to calculate normalized update fraction for excess gas |
| `BLOB_BASE_FEE_UPDATE_FRACTION_NORMALIZED` | `142441600`| excess gas update fraction for the normalized target of `128` blobs |

### Block processing

Upon activation of this EIP, execution clients **MUST** extend the header schema with an
additional 64-bit field: the `target_blobs_per_block`. This value is set to the one provided by the CL during block
production.

Any reference to `TARGET_BLOB_GAS_PER_BLOCK` from [EIP-4844](./eip-4844.md) (for e.g. for `excess_blob_gas` calculations)
can be derived by taking the `target_blobs_per_block` from the EL block header and multiplying by `GAS_PER_BLOB`.

Validity of these values is guaranteed from the consensus layer, much like how withdrawals are handled. Hence when
verifying a block, execution clients **MUST** ensure the target blobs per block in the block header matches the one
provided by the consensus client.

> Furthermore `get_base_fee_per_blob_gas` as specified by [EIP-4844](./eip-4844.md) is as modified below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore `calc_excess_blob_gas` and `get_base_fee_per_blob_gas` as specified by [EIP-4844](./eip-4844.md) is modified as below:
```

```python
def calc_excess_blob_gas(parent: Header) -> int:
  # normalize parent's excess blob gas if this block was fork block

>   if(parent.timestamp < FORK_TIMESTAMP)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  if parent.timestamp < FORK_TIMESTAMP:
```

    # note multiplication of parent excess blob gas with EXCESS_BLOB_GAS_NORMALIZATION_TARGET is before
    # integer division by TARGET_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK_4844 to preserve sensitivity
    normalized_parent_excess_blob_gas = parent.excess_blob_gas * EXCESS_BLOB_GAS_NORMALIZATION_TARGET // TARGET_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK_4844
    target_blobs_per_block = TARGET_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK_4844

>   else

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  else:
```

    normalized_parent_excess_blob_gas = parent.excess_blob_gas
    target_blobs_per_block = parent.target_blobs_per_block

  # note: multiplication of diff with EXCESS_BLOB_GAS_NORMALIZATION_TARGET is before interger 

>   # division by target_blobs_per_block to preserve sensitivity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  # division by target_blobs_per_block to preserve sensitivity
  target_blob_gas = target_blobs_per_block * GAS_PER_BLOB
```

>   return (normalized_parent_excess_blob_gas + ((parent.blob_gas_used - target_blob_gas) * EXCESS_BLOB_GAS_NORMALIZATION_TARGET_BLOBS) // target_blobs_per_block)

Author: what if someone applies BODMAS? wanted to imply multiplication first and int division later for deterministic results

def get_base_fee_per_blob_gas(header: Header) -> int:

>   return fake_exponential(
>     MIN_BASE_FEE_PER_BLOB_GAS,
>     header.excess_blob_gas,
>     BLOB_BASE_FEE_UPDATE_FRACTION_NORMALIZED
>     )

Reviewer: formatting
```suggestion
  return fake_exponential(
      MIN_BASE_FEE_PER_BLOB_GAS,
      header.excess_blob_gas,
      BLOB_BASE_FEE_UPDATE_FRACTION_NORMALIZED
  )
```

```

> Rest of the [EIP-4844](./eip-4844.md) specification is not changed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The rest of the [EIP-4844](./eip-4844.md) specification is not changed.
```
